VERSION CONTROL SOFTWARE

Examples: GitHub, Bitbucket

Why Version Control?

In real projects:

* Multiple developers work on the same project
* They work from different locations and different laptops

This creates problems:

1. How to integrate everyone’s code?
2. How to track changes?

   * Who changed it?
   * When?
   * What was changed?
   * Why it was changed?

To solve these issues, we use Version Control Software.

What is GitHub?

GitHub is a cloud-based platform.
It is used to store, manage, and track source code.
It hosts Git repositories.
For every project, we create one repository.
It provides centralized code storage, access control, change tracking, and collaboration between developers.

All developers push their code to one common place.

Environment Setup

1. Create a GitHub account
   [https://www.github.com](https://www.github.com)

2. Download and install Git
   [https://git-scm.com/downloads](https://git-scm.com/downloads)

Git Bash comes with Git.

3. Configure your name and email

Open Git Bash and run:

git config --global user.name "karthik"
git config --global user.email "[karthikreddybodapati@gmail.com](mailto:karthikreddybodapati@gmail.com)"

Check configuration:

git config --list

Git Architecture

Git has four main areas:

1. Working Tree – where you write and edit files
2. Staging Area – where you prepare files before saving
3. Local Repository – stored on your laptop
4. Central Repository – GitHub (cloud)

Git Workflow (Structure Flow)

Working Tree → Staging Area → Local Repository → Central Repository
git init → git add → git commit → git push

Important commands:

git init → Create repository
git status → Check file status
git add → Move files to staging
git commit → Save changes locally
git log → View commit history
git push → Send code to GitHub

First Time Git Push

When you run git push for the first time:

Git will ask for GitHub username and password or token.
Credentials are saved in Windows Credential Manager.
To use a different GitHub account, open Credential Manager and remove GitHub credentials.

Practical: Git Repository

Step 1: Create a repository on GitHub
Public or Private
Copy the repository URL

Step 2: Open Git Bash and run commands

git init
git remote add origin <repo-url>

Copy project files into the folder.

Step 3: Push code

git status
git add .
git commit -m "First commit"
git push -u origin main

Notes

Git Bash is a client tool to work with GitHub.
All developers push code to the same central repository.
Git keeps full history of who changed, what changed, when it changed, and why it changed.
----------------------
gitinit - to initialize working tree
gitstatus - to check the staging area status
git add - to add files to the staging area
git add.- to add multiple files to the staging area
git commit - send files from the staging area to the local repository.
git log - to check the history
git push - send files from the local repository to the central repository
git restore - to restore the staging files to the working tree and revert the changes back
git config - to configure username and email id.
git clone - to download the central repository to the local repo
git pull - in order to bring the global repo change to the local repo
git fetch- 
git merge<branch-name> - it will merge changes from one branch to another branch and it will preserve commit history
git rebase<branch-name>- it will merge changes from one branch to another branch and it will not preserve commit history
git rm - in order to delete the file from the repo
git clone-b <branch-name><repo-url> - to clone the repo from the selected branch

